Add doc topic for unmanaged calling conventions (#36768)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/native-interop/calling-conventions.md

---
title: Unmanaged calling conventions
description: Learn how to specify unmanaged calling conventions in .NET
author: jkotas
ms.date: 08/19/2023
---

# Unmanaged calling conventions

[Calling conventions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calling_convention) describe low-level details for how method arguments and return values
are passed between the caller and the called method.

> It is important that the unmanaged calling convention declared in P/Invoke declaration matches the unmanaged calling convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important that the unmanaged calling convention declared in a P/Invoke declaration matches the unmanaged calling convention
```

> used by the native implementation. Unmanaged calling convention mismatches lead to data corruptions and fatal crashes that require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used by the native implementation. Mismatches in unmanaged calling conventions lead to data corruptions and fatal crashes that require
```

low-level debugging skills to diagnose.

## Platform default calling convention

Most platforms use one canonical calling convention and an explicitly specified calling convention is unnecessary in most cases.

> For the x86 architecture, the default calling convention is platform-specific. Stdcall ("standard call") is the default calling convention on Windows x86

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the x86 architecture, the default calling convention is platform specific. `Stdcall` ("standard call") is the default calling convention on Windows x86
```

> and it is used by most Win32 APIs. Cdecl is the default calling convention on Linux x86. Windows ports of open source libraries that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and it is used by most Win32 APIs. `Cdecl` is the default calling convention on Linux x86. Windows ports of open-source libraries that
```

> originated on Unix often use the Cdecl calling convention even on Windows x86 and it is necessary to explicitly specify the Cdecl calling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
originated on Unix often use the `Cdecl` calling convention even on Windows x86. It's necessary to explicitly specify the `Cdecl` calling
```

convention in P/Invoke declarations for interop with these libraries.

For non-x86 architectures, both Stdcall and Cdecl calling conventions are treated as the canonical platform default calling convention.

## Specifying calling conventions in managed P/Invoke declarations

> The calling conventions are specific by types in the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices` namespace or their combinations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calling conventions are specified by types in the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices` namespace or their combinations:
```

- [CallConvCdecl](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvCdecl)
- [CallConvFastcall](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvFastcall)
- [CallConvMemberFunction](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvMemberFunction)
- [CallConvStdcall](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvStdcall)
- [CallConvSuppressGCTransition](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvSuppressGCTransition)
- [CallConvThiscall](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvThiscall)

Examples of explicitly specified calling conventions:

```csharp
using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;

> // P/Invoke declaration using SuppressGCTransition calling convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// P/Invoke declaration using SuppressGCTransition calling convention.
```

---
title: Unmanaged calling conventions
description: Learn how to specify unmanaged calling conventions in .NET
author: jkotas
ms.date: 08/19/2023
---

# Unmanaged calling conventions

> [Calling conventions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calling_convention) desribe low-level details for how method arguments and return values

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Calling conventions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calling_convention) describe low-level details for how method arguments and return values
```

are passed between the caller and the called method.

It is important that the unmanaged calling convention declared in P/Invoke declaration matches the unmanaged calling convention
used by the native implementation. Unmanaged calling convention mismatches lead to data corruptions and fatal crashes that require
low-level debugging skills to diagnose.

## Platform default calling convention

> Most platforms use one canonical calling conventions and explicitly specified calling convention is unnecessary in most cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most platforms use one canonical calling convention and an explicitly specified calling convention is unnecessary in most cases.
```

> For x86 architecture, the default calling convention is platform-specific. StdCall is the default calling convention on Windows x86

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the x86 architecture, the default calling convention is platform-specific. Stdcall ("standard call") is the default calling convention on Windows x86
```

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention the name mangling between stdcall and cdecl? For example `Foo@4` vs `_Foo`. That tends to be something people often get caught up on.

Author: I think it is enough to just give people a few hints that calling conventions are a problem on Windows x86. This is not meant to be Windows x86 calling convention troubleshooting doc. I would not mind reducing the Windows x86 specific coverage even more.

Both wikipedia and stackoverflow questions have coverage for the Windows x86 calling convention name mangling issues.

and it is used by most Win32 APIs. Cdecl is the default calling convention on Linux x86. Windows ports of open source libraries that

> originated on Unix often use Cdecl calling convention even on Windows x86 and it is necessary to explicitly specifify the Cdecl calling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
originated on Unix often use the Cdecl calling convention even on Windows x86 and it is necessary to explicitly specify the Cdecl calling
```

convention in P/Invoke declarations for interop with these libraries.

> For non-x86 architectures, both StdCall and Cdecl calling conventions are treated as the canonical platform default calling convention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For non-x86 architectures, both Stdcall and Cdecl calling conventions are treated as the canonical platform default calling convention.
```

> ## Specifying calling conventions in managed P/Invoke declarations

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention the `CallingConvention.Winapi` option?

Author: `CallingConvention.Winapi` is no-op. It is same as default; people do not really need to know that it exists. I think it is enough for it to be mentioned in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.callingconvention?view=net-7.0#fields . 

I plan to add link from CallingConvention.Winapi docs to "Platform default calling convention" paragraph in this doc as a follow up.

> The calling conventions are specific by types in System.Runtime.CompilerServices namespace or their combinations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The calling conventions are specific by types in the System.Runtime.CompilerServices namespace or their combinations:
```

> The calling conventions are specific by types in the System.Runtime.CompilerServices namespace or their combinations:

Author: ```suggestion
The calling conventions are specific by types in the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices` namespace or their combinations:
```

- [CallConvStdcall](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvStdcall)
- [CallConvSuppressGCTransition](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvSuppressGCTransition)
- [CallConvThiscall](xref:System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CallConvThiscall)

Examples of explicitly specified calling conventions:

```csharp
using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;

// P/Invoke declaration using SuppressGCTransition calling convention
[LibraryImport("kernel32.dll")]
[UnmanagedCallConv(CallConvs = new Type[] { typeof(CallConvSuppressGCTransition) })]
extern static ulong GetTickCount64();

// Unmanaged callback with Cdecl calling convention.
[UnmanagedCallersOnly(CallConvs = new Type[] { typeof(CallConvCdecl) })]
static unsafe int NativeCallback(void* context);

// Method returning function pointer with combination of Cdecl and MemberFunction calling conventions.
static unsafe delegate* unmanaged[Cdecl, MemberFunction]<int> GetHandler();
```

## Specifying calling conventions in unmanaged C/C++ code

The default calling convention in unmanaged code is typically specified project-wide via C/C++ compiler options. For individual methods,

> the calling conventions can be specified using the `__stdcall` and `__Cdecl` compiler intrinsics under Microsoft Visual C++, and by using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the calling conventions can be specified using the `__stdcall` and `__cdecl` compiler intrinsics under Microsoft Visual C++, and by using
```

> the `__attribute__((stdcall))` and `__attribute__((Cdecl))` compiler intrinsics under GCC and Clang.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `__attribute__((stdcall))` and `__attribute__((cdecl))` compiler intrinsics under GCC and Clang.
```

> ## Specifying calling conventions in unmanaged C/C++ code
> 
> The default calling convention in unmanaged code is typically specified project-wide via C/C++ compiler options. For individual methods,
> the calling conventions can be specified using the `__stdcall` and `__cdecl` compiler intrinsics under Microsoft Visual C++, and by using
> the `__attribute__((stdcall))` and `__attribute__((cdecl))` compiler intrinsics under GCC and Clang.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
This does not look high-enough value to include in this topic.

## Specifying calling conventions in earlier .NET versions

> .NET Framework and .NET versions prior to .NET 5 are limited to subset of calling conventions that can described by [CallingConvention](xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.CallingConvention) enumeration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.NET Framework and .NET versions prior to .NET 5 are limited to a subset of calling conventions that can described by [CallingConvention](xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.CallingConvention) enumeration.
```
